---
title: 'Graduate School Dreams'
date: 2017-09-01
enddate: 'none'
collection: post
permalink: /posts/2017/08/gradschool/
tags:
  - grad school
  - PhD
  - diary
---

An honest, cheeky, unfiltered brain dump of why I'm ready to go back. Partially an exercise to aid writing 
my statement of purpose, maybe somebody else can solidify  

The Field
======

Industry
------
There's a certain intellectual apathy. The emphasis on product is frustratingly limiting. Of course, 
I know grad school isn't all rainbows and butterflies (it IS compromise that moves us along, after all [it's a Maroon 5 joke.]) 
but there _is_ research direction and personal freedom; it's not "we are literally dead if we don't ship."
I did that, it was fun. It was crazy. It was stressful. I'd love to do that again at some point. 
I really want to experience the creative freedom and direction and _exploration_ that grad school affords.
 
Academia & Affective Computing
------
HAVE YOU HEARD THE GOOD NEWS?
<imc src="/images/goodnews.jpg"/><br>
Affective Computing is the thing I always loved and didn't know was real. I literally
didn't know there was a field for studying emotion in the way I _feel_ it: logically, reasonably, 
with nuance and complexity, and as a dramatic enhancement to my experience on this planet. 
I have never understood why people shied away from it (why STILL indeed?) since it seems like 
the most blatant necessity in the coming "AI revolution."

Honestly, if I had had my shit together coming out of undergrad, I would have applied sooner. But I didn't,
and that's actually way better. I didn't know how to handle myself right out of undergrad,
and now I not only know how to write great code and do like basic time management, but I have
a profound appreciation for my own interest in this field. 

Seriously, I was never one to read white papers for fun (except cognitive neuroscience, Phil Holcolmbe was the best prof)
until I discovered this field because DAMN how can you not!? It's annoying to me that
I understand my passion so deeply that it almost doesn't even feel like there are words for it... 
it's just obvious that rigorously and computationally studying empathy and communication is what I'm meant to do.

Empathy
------
Over a year ago I met my best friend, Ms. Claire Duvallet. Over the course of one year, she 
has prompted more self-reflection and growth than any other influence in my life. She speaks to me
in a way that I hear so uniquely, and goes so deep in our interests. Here's the thing though: there's only
one of her. I am grateful for her friendship, and think about how she helps me; how could her lessons
be distilled and passed on? 

If she teaches me because she adjusts her communication style to me, then surely a machine 
or automated coach could do something similar. This is going to revolutionize _everything_.
 
Lucky for me, MIT seems to be on the education kick too. But obviously it's so much more. 

It's more than customized lesson plans.

It's more than actually helpful UI that doesn't annoy you.

It's more than empathetic<a href="https://www.google.com/search?q=woebot&rlz=1C5CHFA_enUS747US750&oq=woebot&aqs=chrome..69i57j0l5.2632j0j1&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8">therapy bots.</a>

It's more than <a href="https://www.media.mit.edu/projects/engageme/overview/">helping autistic children </a>learn social skills.

It's fucking scary. It's marketing, targeting you. It's cognitive scientists, bayesian modelers, and the most crooked
CEOs you can dream up manipulating you into buying their products. It's <a href="http://www.cnn.com/2017/10/27/politics/trump-campaign-wikileaks-cambridge-analytica/index.html">manipulating 
the cultural psyche</a>. It's FUCKING TERRIFYING.

I'm a good guy. I want to be there to fight bad guys. 

Empathy is this beautiful tool that is like a dope double-edged sword of justice, that both
increases world awesome _and_ decreases world suck. 

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/IOKRR9sYlzc" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe><br>
(for reference)

"Why Grad School?"
======

I'm jealous of my friends
------
I am so envious of my graduate school friends. Every time they invite me to a lecture, or a talk, or 
an interesting speaker or event, I want to go. I'm working hard at the office(s) and that's fine and dandy
but _damn_ do I wish I could leave from 2:30-4:00 most Tuesdays and Thursdays. I've started doing it
more often, but I just wish it were my _job_ to learn new things and become inspired by 
brilliant speakers.
 
I haven't met "the one"
------
I just know where they live. I don't yet know what problem is going to be MINE yet, 
but now I know how to get there. It's Emotional AI. It's Affective Computing. Yo, do you
 think Rosalind Picard would think it's weird if I wrote her thanking her for inventing
 this field like 40 years before I would be able to? 

I Just Know™
------
I've always known. My professors have known, my parents have known, my friends have known. 
I'm just cut out for grad school. I thrive in the chaos and the creativity and the rigor 
and stress and want to steep in it like an intellectual tea bag. 

The most honest thing I can say is: the more I research and look into the groups
I want to work for and learn about the field, the more ideas I have. The bigger my 
excitement gets. The stronger the passion. The more I want it. 

The last time I _knew_ something like this was in my first computer science course. 
 I love the feeling. I love just _knowing_. It's such a relief to have found what I want 
 to dedicate my life to. Now comes the stress of enacting exactly _where_ and _how_ that can happen. 